The Project Gutenberg eBook of To arms for liberty, by Catherine T.
Bryce

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: To arms for liberty
       A pageant of the war for schools and societies

Author: Catherine T. Bryce

Release Date: November 23, 2022 [eBook #69414]

Language: English

Produced by: hekula03, Krista Zaleski and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO ARMS FOR LIBERTY ***





  _To Arms for Liberty_

  _A Pageant of the War_

  _for_

  SCHOOLS AND SOCIETIES

  _BY_

  CATHERINE T. BRYCE

  Assistant Superintendent of Public Schools, Cleveland, Ohio

  [Illustration]

  1918
  C. C. BIRCHARD & COMPANY
  BOSTON




_Copyright 1918 by_

C. C. BIRCHARD AND COMPANY

_International Copyright Secured_


NOTICE

The copying, either of separate parts or the whole of this work by any
process whatsoever, is forbidden by law and subject to the penalties
prescribed by Sec. 28, of the Copyright Law, in force July 1, 1909.
License to perform this work must be secured from the publishers, sole
owners of _all rights_.


_Orchestral parts may be rented from the publishers._




To Arms for Liberty


This Pageant was prepared primarily for grammar schools, but will
be found suitable and interesting for higher grades as well as for
Community Choruses and Societies.

It can be performed on any stage or platform indoors or on the lawn
out-of-doors. No scenery is absolutely necessary, although the use of
a scene representing a spacious interior, if such be available, would
heighten the effect of the performance. Otherwise, a wooded exterior
scene, or in case no scenery is procurable, a background of hangings in
a neutral tint will serve. The costumes for the most part are such as
can be made at home. Boy Scout uniforms will do for the Soldiers, but
naval uniforms may have to be procured for the occasion.

The music, which is an integral part of the Pageant, has been compiled
and published by us in a separate book, and is so arranged that it can
be sung in unison or by mixed voices.

It is intended that the _Chorus_ should be grouped in the background
and sides of the scene throughout the performance, leaving the central
part of the stage and a central entrance for the principal characters.

  THE PUBLISHERS.




CHARACTERS

  BELGIUM
  BRITAIN
  FRANCE
  ITALY

(_Britain’s Daughters_)

  ENGLAND
  IRELAND
  SCOTLAND
  WALES
  CANADA
  INDIA
  AUSTRALIA
  NEW ZEALAND

  SERBIA
  MONTENEGRO
  PORTUGAL
  SAN MARINO
  ROUMANIA
  GREECE
  RUSSIA
  POLAND
  JAPAN


AMERICA

AMERICAN SOLDIERS, SAILORS, Y. M. C. A., and RED CROSS MEN


NOTE

All the allies who entered the war previous to America’s entry are
mentioned, but not in chronological order. That order is as follows:--

  Serbia,             July 28, 1914
  Russia,             Aug.  1, 1914
  France,             Aug.  3, 1914
  Belgium,            Aug.  4, 1914
  Britain,            Aug.  4, 1914
  Montenegro,         Aug.  8, 1914
  Japan,              Aug. 23, 1914
  Italy,              May  24, 1915
  San Marino,         May  24, 1915
  Portugal,           Mar.  9, 1916
  Roumania,           Aug. 27, 1916
  Greece,             Nov. 28, 1918
  United States,      Apr.  6, 1917




TO ARMS FOR LIBERTY




NO. 1. INTRODUCTORY MUSIC: suggesting strife, discord--War.

    THE CURTAIN RISES. BELGIUM, _a girl dressed in Belgian costume,
    clutching Belgium’s flag to her heart, enters and rushes to
    center of stage_.


_BELGIUM_:

Hark! Hark! Do you not hear it? The heavy measured tread, the rumbling
cannon, the screaming shot, the bursting shell, the anguished cries of
my brave children?

Look! Look! Can you not see? Nay, thank God you cannot see what I have
been forced to look upon. (BELGIUM _covers her eyes_.) Oh, my sons! My
brave sons--for ye were brave! Ye fell, but ye fell with your faces to
the foe, defending your homes, your country, and your honor! Still ye
are gone and I am left desolate.

Oh, my children, my children! None too young, none too old, none too
brave, none too tender to escape the brutal destroyer! All lost, lost,
lost!

    (_The distant strains of “Sambre et Meuse” are heard and_
    FRANCE, _a girl dressed in classic white robe, wearing liberty
    cap, and carrying tricolor, enters. She goes to_ BELGIUM’S
    _side and places her hand on the latter’s shoulder_.)

_FRANCE_:

Arise, my Sister. All is _not_ lost! Thine honor and thy truth and thy
loyalty are all untarnished. Pure and white they shine before the eyes
of all the world. Till the stars fade and the sun dies, all men shall
say of thee, “Belgium’s is a consecrated,--Belgium’s is a holy ground!”

Lift up thy flag. It has never trailed in the dust, and it never shall.
Together, shoulder to shoulder, we will face the foe, and _They Shall
Not Pass_. On, on my Sister, on to Victory!

NO. 2. _CHORUS_: “THE MARSEILLAISE”:

  Ye sons of Freedom, wake to glory!
    Hark! Hark! what myriads bid you rise!
  Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
    Behold their tears and hear their cries!
  Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
    With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
  Affright and desolate the land,
    While peace and liberty lie bleeding?

    To arms! To arms! ye brave!
      The avenging sword unsheathe;
    March on! March on! all hearts resolved
      On victory or death.

  Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
    Which treacherous kings, confederate, raise;
  The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,
    And lo! our fields and cities blaze;
  And shall we basely view the ruin,
    While lawless force with guilty stride,
  Spreads desolation far and wide,
    With crimes and blood his hands imbruing?

  O Liberty! can man resign thee,
    Once having felt thy generous flame?
  Can dungeons, bolts, or bars confine thee?
    Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
  Too long the world has wept bewailing
    That falsehood’s dagger tyrants wield,
  But freedom is our sword and shield,
    And all their arts are unavailing.

    (_While the chorus sing “The Marseillaise,”_ FRANCE _and_
    BELGIUM _stand with unfurled flags_. FRANCE, _several steps
    in front of_ BELGIUM, _appears to lead the music. Appropriate
    pantomime during the singing will help._ BELGIUM, _too, shows
    the effects of the music, first, by an awakened look, then by
    advancing one step at a time, until she is shoulder to shoulder
    with_ FRANCE _when the song ends_.)

_BELGIUM_:

Dare I, dare I believe?

_FRANCE_:

Believe? Believe the victory will be ours? Aye, never doubt it. Nor
shall we fight alone. Britain joins our cause.

_BELGIUM_:

Britain? Britain, the proud, the arrogant! Why think ye she will come?

_FRANCE_:

Because she hath promised.

_BELGIUM_:

Promised! Promised! Methinks I have heard that the promises of strong
nations are but “scraps of paper.”

_FRANCE_:

But not Britain’s promises! Proud, arrogant, and strong she may be, but
when was she known to break a treaty? She hath promised her fleets to
guard my shore and I rely on her word. Britain never shall be foresworn.

(_MUSIC: “Rule Britannia” heard as at a distance._)

_BELGIUM_:

Hark! What is that?

_FRANCE_:

There! it is she! Did I not tell you Britain would keep her word?

NO. 3. _CHORUS_: “RULE BRITANNIA”:

  When Britain first at Heaven’s command,
    Arose from out the azure main,
  This was the charter of the land,
    And guardian angels sang the strain:
  Rule, Britannia, rule the waves,
    Britons never shall be slaves.

  Still more majestic shalt thou rise,
    More dreadful from each foreign stroke;
  As the loud blast that tears the skies
    Serves but to root thy native oak.
  Rule, Britannia, rule the waves,
    Britons never shall be slaves.

  Thee, haughty tyrants ne’er shall tame;
    All their attempts to bear thee down
  Will but arouse thy generous flame,
    But work their woe, and thy renown.
  Rule Britannia, rule the waves,
    Britons never shall be slaves.

    (_As the chorus reach the refrain “Rule Britannia, rule
    the waves!”_ BRITAIN _enters. She is dressed as Britannia.
    Accompanying her are_, ENGLAND, _clad in white and rose pink,
    bearing the English standard_; SCOTLAND, _clad in white and
    purple, bearing the Scottish standard_; IRELAND, _dressed in
    white and green, bearing Irish flag_; WALES _dressed in white,
    bearing the Welsh flag_; CANADA, _dressed in white robe,
    trimmed with maple leaves, bearing Canadian flag_, AUSTRALIA
    _and_ NEW ZEALAND, _dressed in robes similar to_ BRITAIN’S
    _other daughters_, INDIA, _clad in native costume_. BRITAIN
    _with her companions grouped about her, occupies the center of
    the stage_, BELGIUM _and_ FRANCE, _the front-left and right_.)

_BRITAIN_ (_touching the Union Jack on her shield with her trident,
then extending it to_ FRANCE):

I have come, my Sister.

_FRANCE_ (_impulsively rushing forward and clasping_ BRITAIN’S _hand_):

I said ye would come. (_Turning to_ BELGIUM.) Said I not so?

_BELGIUM_:

I had thought--I feared--

_BRITAIN_ (_stretching her hand to_ BELGIUM):

I understand, say no more.

  “Men whispered that our arm was weak,
    Men said our blood was cold,
  And that our hearts no longer speak
    The clarion-note of old;
  But let the spear and sword draw near
    The sleeping lion’s den,
  His island shore shall start once more
    To life with armèd men.”

_BRITAIN_ (_continuing_):

Nor think, O Belgium, that thy bravery and thy chivalry count for
naught.

  “Whatever men have done, man may,--
  The deeds you wrought are not in vain!”

(_To_ FRANCE): Not only do I guard the ocean with my fleets; I bring
here my children to aid you in upholding justice, truth and liberty.

England, what is thy message?

_ENGLAND_ (_saluting_):

Ready!

  “Old England’s sons are English yet,
    Old England’s hearts are strong;
  And still she wears her coronet
    Aflame with sword and song.
  As in their pride our fathers died,
    If need be, so die we;
  So wield we still, gainsay who will,
    The sceptre of the sea.”

_BRITAIN_:

“England, stand fast; let heart and hand be steady; Be thy first word
thy last,--Ready, aye, ready!”

NO. 4. _CHORUS_: “YE MARINERS OF ENGLAND!”

  The meteor flag of England
    Shall yet terrific burn;
  Till danger’s troubled night depart
    And the star of peace return.
  Then, then, ye ocean-warriors!
    Our song and feast shall flow
  To the fame of your name,
    When the storm has ceased to blow!
  When the fiery fight is heard no more,
    And the storm has ceased to blow!

_BRITAIN_:

Ireland, what message do you bring?

_IRELAND_ (_stepping forward and saluting_):

  And when did Erin e’er hold back,
    When Freedom called for men?
  I’m with you to the finish, friends,
    For God and the Right, Amen!

_ALL_ (_with upraised banners_):

“God and the Right, Amen!”

NO. 5. _CHORUS_: “THE MINSTREL-BOY”:

  The minstrel-boy to the war is gone,
    In the ranks of death you’ll find him;
  His father’s sword he has girded on,
    And his wild harp slung behind him.
  “Land of song!” cried the warrior-bard,
    “Though all the world betrays thee,
  One sword, at least, thy rights shall guard,
    One faithful heart shall praise thee.”

_BRITAIN_:

Scotland, what is thy message?

_SCOTLAND_ (_stepping forward and saluting_):

  From Scotia’s Isles and storm-tossed shore,
    From fortress-rock and peaceful glen,
    Come ranks of lion-hearted men--
    Come clansmen true as knights of old,
    Meet warriors for achievement bold,
  Loving their home, but Freedom more!

(_Continues, peering and pointing as if seeing a far-off vision_):

  I see their plaids and tartans wave,
  I know them, bravest of the brave!
  I see their eyes with purpose fired;
  I know their hearts with right inspired;
  I know their purpose--all mine own--
  That Freedom shall resume her throne!
  Hear! hear their slogan stern and old--
  Meet slogan for my warriors bold!

NO. 6 _CHORUS_: “SCOTS WHA HAE”:

  Wha for Scotland’s king and law
    Freedom’s sword will strongly draw,
  Freeman stand, or freeman fa’,
    Let him follow me!

  By oppression’s woes and pains!
    By your sons in servile chains,
  We will drain our dearest veins,
    But they shall be free!

  Lay the proud usurpers low!
    Tyrants fall in every foe!
  Liberty at every blow!
    Let us do or die!

_ALL_:

“Let us do or die!”

_BRITAIN_:

Wales, what is thy message?

_WALES_ (_stepping forward and saluting_):

  Since Arthur formed his table round,
    Within my favored land,
  And taught each page, and squire, and knight,
    For Freedom’s cause to stand,
  And ’gainst oppression urge their might,
  My sons have stood for God and right.
  And so we join you in this fight!

NO. 7. _CHORUS_: “HARLECH”:

  Men of Harlech! in the hollow,
  Do you hear like rushing billow,
  Wave on wave that surging follow,
    Battle’s distant sound?
  ’Tis the tramp of Saxon foeman,
  Saxon spearmen, Saxon bowmen,
  Be they knights, or hinds, or yeomen,
    They shall bite the ground!
  Loose the folds asunder,
  Flag we conquer under!
    The placid sky now bright on high,
  Shall launch its bolts in thunder,
  Onward! ’tis our country needs us.
  He is bravest, he who leads us!
  Honor’s self now proudly heads us!
    Freedom, God, and Right!

_BRITAIN_:

Canada, youngest of my daughters, ye send each gallant son forth, a
maiden-knight, to earn his spurs. What is thy message?

_CANADA_ (_advancing and saluting_):

  “I give my soldier boy a blade,
    In fair Damascus fashioned well;
  Who first the glittering falchion swayed,
    Who first beneath its fury fell,
  I know not; but I hope to know,
    That for no mean or hireling trade,
  To guard no feeling base or low--
    I give my soldier boy the blade!

  “For country’s claim at honor’s call,
    For outraged friend, insulted maid.
  At mercy’s voice to bid it fall--
    I give my soldier boy the blade!”

_FRANCE_:

The sword unsheathed in such a cause will ne’er be tarnished. It will
return to you, my Sister, laureled with the deeds of thy brave sons. I
know it! I know it!

NO. 8. _CHORUS_: “THE MAPLE LEAF FOREVER!”

  On many a hard-fought battle field
    Our brave fathers, side by side,
  For loved ones, home and freedom dear,
    Firmly stood and nobly died.
  And those dear rights which they maintained
    We swear to yield them never;
  God save our land and Heaven bless
    The Maple Leaf forever.

  The Maple Leaf, our emblem dear,
    May we forsake it never;
  God save our land and Heaven bless
    The Maple Leaf forever!

_BRITAIN_:

India, what message do you bear?

_INDIA_ (_advancing and making native salaam_):

  I bring thee the loving homage,
    Of a people thy justice has won,
  I pledge ye our faith and our service.
    Till the day of the despot is done.

_BRITAIN_:

Well spoken, my daughter. I knew I could rely on thy loyalty.
Australia, fair and independent, what word do you bring?

_AUSTRALIA_ (_advancing and saluting_):

  My great grey ships are on their way,
    Plowing the crested wave,
  A precious freight they’re carrying
    My gallant sons and brave.

_BRITAIN_:

Aye, gallant and brave and strong are they! New Zealand, what is thy
message?

_NEW ZEALAND_ (_advancing and saluting_):

  I heard you calling, Mother,
    I bring you of my best,
  My splendid men, my Mother,
    God guard them in this test.

_BRITAIN AND HER DAUGHTERS_ (_with upraised faces_):

  God, guard our men!

NO. 9. _CHORUS_: (_Tune_--“GOD SAVE THE KING”):

  “God bless our splendid men,
    Send them safe home again,
  God bless our men.
    Keep them victorious,
  Strong, clean and glorious,
    They are so dear to us,
  God bless our men.”

    (_During the singing of the above verse, all stand in an
    attitude of supplication._)

_BELGIUM_:

O Britain, well mayest thou be proud! With such loyal daughters and
such gallant sons, thou art invincible.

_FRANCE_:

Lo! one crowned with sorrow approaches. It is Serbia and with her comes
her neighbor, Montenegro. (_Enter_ SERBIA _and_ MONTENEGRO. _Each is
dressed in National costume and carries National flag._)

NO. 10. _CHORUS_: “SERBIAN HYMN”:

  Up and arise the Nations call you!
    Men of Serbia rise as one,
  Honor calls, whate’er befall you,
    Up and strike till Freedom’s won!
  Though the wrong may seem to conquer,
    Truth and Justice will prevail,
  Up and onward to the battle,
    Freedom’s cause shall never fail.
  Up and strike till Freedom’s won!
      Strike till Freedom’s won!

_SERBIA_ (_holding forth her hands as begging for sympathy_):

Woe, woe is me, that the deed of one of my weakest sons should be made
the excuse for this world-wide war! Mad was the deed, and mad the
boy--but must the world be set on fire for such a cause?

I would have prevented it if I could. Did I not yield all, all, all I
could and save mine honor? Speak to me! Tell me, my Sisters, that I am
guiltless of this world-agony!

_ALL_ (_stepping forward and extending the right hand to Serbia_):

We pronounce thee guiltless.

    (_The last strains of the Russian Hymn are heard and_ RUSSIA
    _enters, followed by_ POLAND. RUSSIA _is clad in National
    costume and carries the Russian flag_. POLAND _is in
    characteristic costume, but carries no flag_.)

_BELGIUM_:

O Russia, dost thou too love Freedom?

_RUSSIA_:

  I’ve dreamed a dream--a wondrous dream--
    I’ve dreamed it long--aye, long;
  And in my dream, my people stand--
    Brave _freemen_, true and strong.

  No men have longed for Liberty
    As Russia’s sons have yearned,
  In the hearts that know oppression,
    Freedom’s light most fiercely burns.

  The day will come--I know not when
    But still mine eyes shall see
  My dream--my dream of dreams--come true,
    And Russia’s sons be free.

NO. 11. _CHORUS_: HYMN TO NEW RUSSIA:

  New Russia, rise and proudly stand
    Where men and heroes are;
  Go forth with Freedom, hand in hand,
    Thine eyes upon a star!

  Create a land where men are peers,
    Where laws, not monarchs, reign,
  And take thine heritage of years
    Made sacred by thy pain!

_ALL_:

May Russia’s sons be free!

_FRANCE_:

And Poland’s, too. Brave men whose hearts have ever yearned for
Freedom’s crown!

NO. 12. _CHORUS_: POLAND FAIR:

  Poland Fair, thou bright and lovely land,
    Ne’er to be forsaken;
  Loyal sons obey thy proud command:
    Ev’ry soul awaken!
  Sacred land, we love thee well,
  Our hearts unite beneath thy spell;
  Take, O Country, all thy sons can give,
  Poland fair, thy name shall live!

    (_A trumpet call sounds._)

_FRANCE_:

Hark! Another friend approaches from the fair South!

NO. 13. _CHORUS_: GARIBALDI’S HYMN:

  All forward to battle! the trumpets are crying,
    All forward! all forward! our old flag is flying.
  When liberty calls us, we linger no longer.
    Ye tyrants, come on! Tho’ a thousand to one!
  Hurrah for the banner, the flag of the free!

    (_Enter_ ITALY, _dressed in National costume_.)

_FRANCE_:

Now, welcome, Sister Italy. I have looked for thy coming.

_BELGIUM_:

Twice welcome art thou, for I, too, hoped for your aid.

_BRITAIN_:

Thrice welcome art thou. For well I know that in thee still lives the
greatness that was Rome.

_ITALY_:

Yea, and dauntless as Romans of old come my sons to strike for liberty.
Now as then--

  The horsemen and the footmen
    Are pouring in amain
  From many a stately market place,
    From many a fruitful plain,
  From many a lonely hamlet,
    Which, hid by beech and pine,
  Like an eagle’s nest, hangs on the crest
    Of purple Apennine.

And the same spirit that urged the hero of old to face the foe, fires
the hearts and strengthens the hand of my younger sons, for--


  “How can a man die better
    Than facing fearful odds,
  For the ashes of his fathers,
    And the temples of his Gods?”

NO. 14. _CHORUS_: “SOUND! TRUMPET!”

  Hark! from the vine-cover’d valley,
    Up to the mountains above,
  Loud rings the signal to rally
    Under the banner we love.
  Aloft bright pennons are glancing,
    And ev’ry heart beats high;
  Proudly the hosts are advancing
    To fight and if need be, to die!

              _Chorus._

  Sound! trumpet, sound! let the battle-cry
    Re-echo from mountain to strand!
  Sound ye the strain that shall lead us on
    To strike for Italia, our land!

    God of the fathers who perish’d
      Seeking the birthright we claim,
    Thine is the flow’r we have cherished,
      Ne’er let it wither in shame!
    The fires of Freedom are lighted,
      With deathless flame they glow;
    Forward! in faith all united,
      To strike and to vanquish the foe!

_BELGIUM_:

O Italy, thy proud spirit shall again triumph!

    (_Music--Japanese National Song--is heard off stage._)

NO. 15. _CHORUS_: JAPANESE NATIONAL SONG:

  “Just as leaves by autumn sown
  Red and fair to earth are blown,
  Just as these never cease
  Year by year to shed their peace,
  Thus shall be Freedom’s reign to Eternity.”

    (_As Chorus sings the last lines_ JAPAN _enters. She is clad
    in Japanese costume and carries the Japanese flag. During
    the singing of the last line, she makes the National salaam,
    remaining with her forehead to the ground until the last note
    has died away._)

_BRITAIN_:

We bid you welcome, my Sister. Great indeed is the cause that unites
East and West.

_FRANCE_:

Freedom’s cause alone can work so great a miracle.

_JAPAN_:

  To Eastward ringing, to Eastward winging,
    Came Freedom’s call to me.
  “Send forth thy sons, thy gallant sons,
    To guard fair Liberty!”

  To Westward winging, to Westward bringing
    My dauntless sons so true,
  I’ve travelled half way round the earth
    To take my stand with you.

    (_Martial airs heard off stage._)

_MONTENEGRO_:

Hark! Others come to join us from the South.

    (_Enter_ SAN MARINO, PORTUGAL, ROUMANIA, _and_ GREECE. _Each is
    dressed in National costume and carries National flag._)

_SAN MARINO_:

As the oldest, though the smallest, Republic in the world I have come
to strike a blow for Freedom.

_PORTUGAL_:

And I will stand by you, my Sister, till

  “Freedom’s perils be outbraved,
  And Freedom’s flag, wherever waved,
  Shall overshadow none enslaved.”

NO. 16. _CHORUS_: OH, COME, ALL YE VALIANT:

(_Tune--Portuguese Hymn_):

  Oh, come all ye valiant,
    Join our high endeavor,
  Oh, come ye, oh, come ye, now in
    Freedom’s name.
  Oh, come, strike for Freedom
    Our country now is calling,
  Oh, come and strike for Freedom!
  Oh, come and strike for Freedom!
  Oh, come and strike for Freedom!
    Our God, and Right!

_ROUMANIA_:

  “We are they whose firm battalions
    Trained to fight, not fly,
  Know the cause of good will triumph,
    It will triumph though we die!”

NO. 17. _CHORUS_: ROUMANIAN HYMN:

  Long live fair Liberty,
  Honor and Peace she brings--
    Peace to our well-loved land,
  Honor to mankind.
  Freedom all glorious in God’s own gift to all,
  We will fight; we may die,
    But right shall ever stand.
  O God Almighty, O God of Heaven,
    Uphold with mighty hand,
  Fair Freedom’s name and cause!

  O may the day soon come
      When peace on earth is won
      All strife and hate be past.
      Truth and right defended
  Right shall reign glorious--all men shall hear its call.
  Truth shall rise; Right prevail
  And peace at last shall come.
  O God Almighty, O heav’nly Father,
      Uphold with mighty hand,
  Fair Freedom’s name and cause!

_GREECE_:

Doubt not that my sons will acquit themselves as did their fathers “on
old Plataea’s day.” They are

  “True as the steel of their tried blades,
    Heroes in heart and hand,
  The sons of sires who conquered there,
    With arm to strike and soul to dare,
  As quick, as far as they.”

_BRITAIN_:

Ah, my Sister, may ye prove to the world that “the glory that was
Greece” still abides with thy sons.

_FRANCE_:

Still others come to join us. From the frozen North, from the sunny
South, and from the far East they come.

_BELGIUM_:

What of the West? What of America--the great, the strong, the free--is
she coming?

_FRANCE_:

Not yet.

_BRITAIN_:

But she will come! Well I know her. Ours are

  “Sons of the self-same race.
  And blood of the self-same clan.”

_ITALY_:

Yes, she will come. Well is she named Columbia, after my gallant son
Columbus. Can’st see him as he steered his bark to Columbia’s shore,
when

  “Pale and worn, he kept his deck,
    And peered through darkness. Ah, that night
  Of all dark nights! And then a speck--
    A light! A light! A light! A light!
  It grew--a starlit flag unfurled,
    It grew to be Time’s burst of dawn.
  He gained a world; he gave that world
    Its grandest lesson: ‘On and On.’”

That light became the light of Freedom. That light is still upheld
clear and pure by Columbia. In that light she will press “on and on”
till tyranny be banished from the earth.

_FRANCE_:

Aye, she will come, if but to pay back the debt of gratitude she owes
us for our aid when she won her Independence.

_BELGIUM_:

She must come, for we need her aid.

_BRITAIN_:

America is proud; she will repay her debt of gratitude, France. America
is generous; she will send you aid, Belgium.

NO. 18. MUSIC OF LARGO. (_All look to the rear._ _Enter_--CHARITY,
HOPE, _and_ FAITH; CHARITY _carries large cornucopia_.)

_CHARITY_:

We bear ye greetings and gifts from America.

_BELGIUM_:

Ah, I know you. Ye are Charity.

_CHARITY_:

Call me by my new name, Love, for the love of America sends me and my
Sisters with help and messages of cheer.

_HOPE_:

I am Hope. Never despair. Ye shall triumph. “Be staunch, and valiant,
and free, and strong.”

_FAITH_:

I am Faith. Press on--

  “I do not know beneath what sky
      Nor on what seas shall be thy fate;
  I only know it shall be high,
    I only know it shall be great.”

    (_Enter_ MERCY, _a Red Cross nurse_, CHARITY _takes her by the
    hand and leads her forward_.)

_MERCY_:

Thy Sister, America, has heard thy call for help, and sends me. I am
ready for service.

NO. 19. _CHORUS_: THE RED CROSS:

(_Tune--Battle Hymn of the Republic_):

  Mine eyes have seen the glory of the Red Cross on the White;
  It carries ease and comfort to the soldiers in the fight,
  It strengthens their endeavors in the battle for the right,
                Its mercy never fails!
            Hail the Red Cross then forever,
                Its mercy never fails!

  At the call of suffering thousands it now flies across the sea,
  The homeless hosts of Belgium know its mercy kind and free,
  In prison camps in Europe it breathes hope and liberty,
                Its mercy never fails!
            Hail the Red Cross then forever,
                Its mercy never fails!

_FRANCE_:

Your gifts and messages bring comfort and inspiration, but why does
America wait?

_CHARITY_:

“With malice toward none, with charity for all,” America has sought to
live at peace with all men. “With firmness in the right as God gives
her to see the right,” she will act when the time comes.

_BRITAIN_ (_to_ FRANCE _and_ BELGIUM):

Said I not so? (_Turning toward West with outstretched arms_):

  “Columbia, Sister of the West,
    With all of Nature’s gifts endowed,
  With all of Heaven’s mercies blessed,
    Nor of thy power unduly proud,
  Peerless in courage, force, and skill,
  And godlike in thy strength of will,--

  “Before thy feet the ways divide;
    One path leads up to heights sublime;
  Downward the other slopes, where bide
    The refuse and the wreck of Time.
  Choose, then, nor falter at the start,
  O choose the nobler path and part!”

_FRANCE_ (_stepping to_ BRITAIN’S _side, continues_):

  “Be thou the guardian of the weak,
    Of the unfriended, thou the friend;
  No guerdon for thy valor seek.
    No end beyond the avowèd end.
  Wouldst thou thy godlike power preserve,
    Be godlike in the will to serve.”

    (_Others join_ BRITAIN _and_ FRANCE _in silent supplication.
    Music softly, first lines of “Star-Spangled Banner.” While
    music sounds, the American Flag is unfurled from above over
    stage. Immediately_ AMERICA _enters. She is dressed like_
    COLUMBIA _and carries a lighted torch. While she stands a
    moment in the center at the rear, music changes to “Hail
    Columbia,” while all on stage salute her._)

_ALL_:

Hail! Hail! Columbia!

_AMERICA_:

  “Prince of Light, or Prince of Darkness!
    I have chosen for the world,
  On the side of deathless freedom
    I my banner have unfurled.”

_AMERICA_ (_to Belgium_):

  “Little Belgium, crushed and bleeding,
    Martyred by the cruel horde,
  Crowned with thorns, yet bravely fighting,
    Thou shalt live to be restored!”

          (_to France_):

  “France, the fair, with face uplifted,
    Radiant courage on you waits,
  Thou shalt beat the hordes of Prussia,
    Seeking entrance at thy gates.”

_FRANCE_:

They shall not pass! They shall not pass!

_AMERICA_ (_to Britain_):

              “Britons, ye
  Who guard the sacred outpost, not in vain
    Hold your proud peril! Freemen undefiled
  Keep watch and ward! Let battlements be piled
    Around your cliffs; fleets marshalled, till the main
  Sink under them; and if your courage wane,
    Through force or fraud, look westward to your child.”

_BRITAIN_:

  “Now fling them out to the breeze,
    Shamrock, Thistle and Rose,
  And the Star-Spangled Banner unfurl with these--
    A message to friends and to foes
  Wherever the sails of peace are seen, and wherever
    The war wind blows--

  “A message to bond and thrall to wake,
    For whenever we come, we twain,
  The throne of the tyrant shall rock and quake,
    And his menace be void and vain,
  For you are lords of a strong land,
    And we are lords of the main.”

    (_While_ BRITAIN _speaks_, IRELAND, SCOTLAND, _and_ ENGLAND
    _group flags beside Stars and Stripes_.)

_AMERICA_ (_to Canada_):

  “Valiant neighbor of my home land,
    The flower of thy Canadian youth;
  At the front where danger gathers
    Bravely stand for God and Truth.”

          (_to Italy_):

  “In the bright and sunny Southland,
    Where thy sons are fighting sore,
  Garibaldi’s spirit liveth
    As the wine of life they pour.”

          (_to All_):

  “Noble Sisterhood of Nations,
    I have joined thy vanguard, too;
  Freedom’s torch is brightly burning,
    And I pass it on to you.”

    (_Waves torch and all light electric torches which have been
    concealed; these they raise aloft as_ AMERICA _continues_):

  “Bear aloft its sacred message
    To all nations of the earth,
  Till a world-wide peace forever
    Comes to bless us with new birth.”

NO. 20. _CHORUS_: HAIL, COLUMBIA:

  Firm, united let us be,
  Rallying around our Liberty,
  As a band of brothers joined,
  Peace and safety we shall find.

    (_Bugles heard off stage._)

_AMERICA_:

They come! my gallant sons! All are with me. (_Unfurls service flag._)
See my service flag--a star for every state and none missing.

NO. 21. MEDLEY OF PATRIOTIC AIRS.

    (AMERICAN SOLDIERS _and_ SAILORS _march in; a line of_ RED
    CROSS MEN _in the van. When all are in places at the rear of
    the stage their leader approaches and salutes_ COLUMBIA. _She
    hands him the service flag which he passes to a soldier who
    holds it at the right of the large American flag. A_ RED CROSS
    MAN _holds the flag of the Red Cross at the left_. COLUMBIA
    _and the leader of the soldiers stand before the large flag_.)

_LEADER_: THE AMERICAN FLAG:

  Stars of the early dawning, set in a field of blue;
  Stripes of the sunrise splendor, crimson and white of hue;
  Flag of our fathers’ fathers, born on the field of strife,
  Phoenix of fiery battle, risen from human life;
  Given for God and Freedom, sacred, indeed the trust
  Left by the countless thousands returned to the silent dust.

  Flag of a mighty nation waving aloft unfurled;
  Kissed by the sun of heaven, caressed by the winds of the world.
  Greater than kingly power, greater than all mankind;
  Conceived in the need of the hour, inspired by the Master Mind;
  Over the living children, over the laureled grave,
  Streaming on high in the cloudless sky, banner our fathers gave.
  Under thy spangled folds thy children await to give
  All that they have or are that the flag they love shall live.

NO. 22. _CHORUS_: UNDER THE STARS AND STRIPES:

  High on the world did our fathers of old,
    Under the stars and stripes,
  Blazon the name that we now must uphold,
    Under the stars and stripes.
  Vast in the past they have builded an arch
  Over which Freedom has lighted her torch.
  Follow it! Follow it! Come, let us march
    Under the stars and stripes!

              _Chorus._

        Under the stars and stripes,
        Under the stars and stripes!
    Follow it, follow it, come, let us march
        Under the stars and stripes!
    Follow it, follow it, come, let us march
        Under the stars and stripes!

  We in whose bodies the blood of them runs,
    Under the stars and stripes,
  We will acquit us as sons of their sons,
    Under the stars and stripes.
    Ever for justice, our heel upon wrong,
  We in the light of our vengeance thrice strong
  Rally together! Come tramping along
    Under the stars and stripes!

_SOLDIERS AND SAILORS_ (_with hands at salute_):

“I pledge allegiance to my Flag, and to the Republic for which it
stands--one Nation, indivisible, with Liberty and Justice for all.”

_AMERICA_:

“Freedom for all, forever!”

FINALE: (_Last stanza of_--STAR-SPANGLED BANNER):

_CHORUS_: _ALL_:

  “Oh! thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand
    Between their loved homes and the war’s desolation,
  Blessed with victory and peace, may the heaven rescued land
    Praise the power that has made and preserved us a nation.
  Then conquer we must, for our cause it is just,
    And this be our motto: ‘In God is our trust,’
  And the Star-Spangled Banner in triumph shall wave
    O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave!”

_CURTAIN_


The quotations used have been selected from the following:

  READY, AYE, READY              _Herman C. Merivale_
  I GIVE MY SOLDIER BOY A BLADE      _William Maginn_
  HORATIUS AT THE BRIDGE         _Thomas B. Macaulay_
  COLUMBUS                           _Joaquin Miller_
  UNMANIFEST DESTINY          _Henry Holcomb Bennett_
  THE PARTING OF THE WAYS          _Joseph B. Gilder_
    (_To fit the context the first line of this poem has been
    slightly changed. The original reads, “Untrammelled Giant of
    the West.”_)
  A SONG OF THE ALLIES                  _Irene Brush_
  TO ENGLAND                     _George Henry Boker_
  TO AMERICA                          _Alfred Austin_
  THE AMERICAN FLAG              _Charles G. Crellin_
  ARMAGEDDON                           _Edwin Arnold_
  MARCO BOZZARIUS               _Fitz-Greene Halleck_



NOTES ON MUSIC

_To fit the context the last line of the Japanese National Song has
been slightly altered._




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO ARMS FOR LIBERTY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
